+++
title = 'From Software Engineering to Cybersecurity: Professional Path'
date = 2024-08-21T08:53:43-05:00
tags = ['Career','Skills','Continuous Learning','Tech Journey','Professional Growth'
]
#categories = ['Professional Growth']
#weight = 1
+++

My professional journey began during my time at university, where I worked as an assistant professor. This role involved teaching and helping students from various engineering disciplines learn the basics of programming. It helped me refined my ability to break down complex ideas into simpler parts.

In 2015, I worked on a freelance project with Global Change Fluxphera, a company focused on process improvement, implementation, and change management through systems and learning processes. I led the development and deployment of a collaborative virtual real-time web game designed to positively influence organizational behavior. This project involved working with *Node.js*, setting up virtual machines on *AWS*, and configuring *Docker* containers to ensure seamless execution of all parts. It was a six-month project that not only enhanced my technical skills but also taught me the importance of adaptability and delivering tailored solutions that meet client specifications.

Following this project, I joined Sqimi in 2016, a consulting company where I started working with *OutSystems*, a low-code platform for web developement. Although low-code and web development weren't my first choices, I quickly adapted to the evolving industry trends, focusing on web technologies.
Here I joined a project about maintaining and developing various aspects of a custom Customer Relationship Management (CRM) system, particularly focusing on customer services at stores for a Highway Toll Company.  

One of the most significant challenges I faced on this project was splitting and migrating the on-premise infrastructure to a cloud service. This task involved splitting the internal *Oracle* database schema into parts, syncing a subset of the datamodel to the cloud for customer-facing applications and ensuring seamless functionality for both internal processes and customer-facing applications. 

After spending 3 years at Sqimi I knew I was ready to take on a new challenge. In 2019, I joined IG&H, where I participated on diverse challenges and projects that further expanded my expertise, with contributions across multiple domains, including pension solutions, travel agency digitalization, research and development, and performance evaluation systems.

One of my early projects was on healthcare to support diabetic patients, where I played a key role in developing the first iteration of platform for diabetic patients to track and share their health data. This application allowed healthcare professionals to monitor patients’ values, medication, and overall well-being, shifting the focus of healthcare from reactive to proactive.

I joined a project in the pension domain, where I contributed to transitioning from an old system to a new core system for managing pension funds. My responsibilities included gathering detailed requirements from the business side, migrating data from an *Oracle* database to *SQL Server* to support *Outsystems* development, and building a CI/CD pipeline in *Jenkins*. I integrated this pipeline with *Outsystems Lifetime* tool to automate acceptance tests and code deployments across multiple AWS environments. Additionally, I set up *AWS SQS* for sharing work items between services, configured an *AWS SNS* Topics for event notifications, managed *AWS S3* buckets for third-party file reception, and monitored all services using *CloudWatch*. This project taught me the critical importance of clear communication between technical and business teams.

In 2021, I joined the research and development team, where I worked on innovative projects that advanced low-code software development. Our responsibilities included providing support, particularly when integrating technologies outside of *Outsystems*. I developed the integration with *Azure Active Directory* and assisted with integrating other *SAML* providers into *Outsystems*. I also incorporated additional cloud services into the *Outsystems* environment, such as implementing API management solutions with Azure *API Management* and setting up *SignalR*. 

Although a lot of our focus was still development, one of the highlights of my research-focused development work was a project where we built a virtual engagement agent with gamification elements for employees. This system allowed employees to set and achieve personal KPIs in a gamified environment, leveraging Azure Cloud services like message queues, Azure Functions, and Azure Cosmos for the database. We also implemented SignalR for real-time communication and notifications, ensuring smooth interaction between system components.

As the lead Outsystems developer, I spearheaded the design and implementation of a Performance Evaluation App for the company. The app, built with a microservices architecture, included a feedback system for continuous improvement, a goal management component for tracking professional objectives, a mentor application to enhance mentor-mentee relationships through feedback and goal monitoring, and an evaluation tool for streamlined assessments and detailed KPI analysis. Each system had an independent database, making synchronization crucial. We used *Azure Event Bus* to notify key events to other systems, and implemented a graph database as the source of truth within SQL Server to ensure it was schemaless and adaptable to future changes, rather than using *Azure Cosmos DB for Apache Gremlin*.

In 2023, I led the digitalization project for a travel agency, where I integrated *OutSystems*, *OpenRPA*, and AI to enhance customer support and integrate with *Zendesk*. I used OutSystems as the central integration point between the old CRM and a robotic workforce in *OpenRPA*, automating notifications to customers about flights, hotels, and support interactions. This project was particularly exciting because it involved leveraging AI, specifically *OpenAI GPT-3*, to interpret and extract flight change information from emails. The outcome was a dynamic customer support system that significantly improved both efficiency and accuracy in the customer support workflow.

Later that year, I won First Prize in a competition, demonstrating how Outsystems can excel in rapidly developing a proof of concept within just a few hours. I participated in the Healthcare Hackathon in Mainz, Germany. The event aimed to "Rethink health" by bringing together interdisciplinary teams of doctors, nurses, experts, employees, and patients to develop creative solutions for the future of healthcare. As one of the key developers, my team and I presented a transformation tool designed to streamline the back-office process for acquiring medical equipment in clinics using *Outsystems* and *DocuSign*. This tool enabled clinics to manage the entire acquisition process, from initial requests to formal contract creation with suppliers, all while leveraging digital signatures for approval from various stakeholders.

In my last project with IG&H, we implemented an ontology application for the pension solution domain. The goal was to define the Netherlands pension system, from legislation to the services provided, enabling the generation of quotes and contracts through the application. The most challenging and interesting aspect was creating a new language to represent conditions between the ontology's properties and concepts. To validate the ontology, we built a parser and interpreter using *JavaScript* with *PeggyJS*, allowing it to run in a dedicated javascript environment like *Azure Functions* or on the Outsystems server through integration with the *Jint* JS engine.
